THE EPISTLE to the READER.
reader,
I here put into thy hands, what has been the diversion of some of my idle and heavy hours: if it has the good luck to prove so of any of thi
ne, and thou hast but half so much pleasure in reading, as I had in writing it, thou wilt as little think thy money, as I do my pains, ill b
estowed. Mistake not this, for a commendation of my work; nor conclude, because I was pleased with the doing of it, that therefore I am fond
ly taken with it now it is done. He that hawks at larks and sparrows, has no less sport, though a much less considerable quarry, than he tha
t flies at nobler game: and he is little acquainted with the subject of this treatise, the UNDERSTANDING, who does not know, that as it is t
he most elevated faculty of the soul, so it is employed with a greater and more constant delight than any of the other. Its searches after t
ruth, are a sort of hawking and hunting, wherein the very pursuit makes a great part of the pleasure. Every step the mind takes in its progr
ess towards knowledge, makes some discovery, which is not only new, but the best too, for the time at least.
For the understanding, like the eye, judging of objects only by its own sight, cannot but be pleased with what it discovers, having less reg
ret for what has escaped it, because it is unknown. Thus he who has raised himself above the alms-basket, and not content to live lazily on 
scraps of begged opinions, sets his own thoughts on work, to find and follow truth, will (whatever he lights on) not miss the hunter’s satis
faction; every moment of his pursuit will reward his pains with some delight, and he will have reason to think his time not ill-spent, even 
when he cannot much boast of any great acquisition.
This, Reader, is the entertainment of those who let loose their own thoughts, and follow them in writing; which thou oughtest not to envy th
em, since they afford thee an opportunity of the like diversion, if thou wilt make use of thy own thoughts in reading. It is to them, if the
y are thy own, that I refer myself: but if they are taken upon trust from others, it is no great matter what they are, they not following tr
uth, but some meaner consideration; and it is not worth while to be concerned, what he says or thinks, who says or thinks only as he is dire
cted by another. If thou judgest for thyself, I know thou wilt judge candidly; and then I shall not be harmed or offended, whatever be thy c
ensure. For though it be certain, that there is nothing in this treatise, of the truth whereof I am not fully persuaded; yet I consider myse
lf as liable to mistakes, as I can think thee, and know that this book must stand or fall with thee, not by any opinion I have of it, but th
y own. If thou findest little in it new or instructive to thee, thou art not to blame me for it. It was not meant for those that had already
 mastered this subject, and made a thorough acquaintance with their own understandings; but for my own information, and the satisfaction of 
a few friends, who acknowledged themselves not to have sufficiently considered it. Were it fit to trouble thee with the history of this Essa
y, I should tell thee, that five or six friends meeting at my chamber, and discoursing on a subject very remote from this, found themselves 
quickly at a stand, by the difficulties that rose on every side. After we had a while puzzled ourselves, without coming any nearer a resolut
ion of those doubts which perplexed us, it came into my thoughts, that we took a wrong course; and that before we set ourselves upon inquiri
es of that nature, it was necessary to examine our own abilities, and see what objects our understandings were, or were not, fitted to deal 
with. This I proposed to the company, who all readily assented; and thereupon it was agreed, that this should be our first inquiry. Some has
ty and undigested thoughts on a subject I had never before considered, which I set down against our next meeting, gave the first entrance in
to this discourse; which having been thus begun by chance, was continued by intreaty; written by incoherent parcels; and after long interval
s of neglect, resumed again, as my humour or occasions permitted; and at last, in a retirement, where an attendance on my health gave me lei
sure, it was brought into that order thou now seest it.
This discontinued way of writing may have occasioned, besides others, two contrary faults, viz. that too little and too much may be said in 
it. If thou findest any thing wanting, I shall be glad, that what I have writ gives thee any desire, that I should have gone farther: if it 
seems too much to thee, thou must blame the subject; for when I put pen to paper, I thought all I should have to say on this matter, would h
ave been contained in one sheet of paper, but the farther I went, the larger prospect I had; new discoveries led me still on, and so it grew
 insensibly to the bulk it now appears in. I will not deny, but possibly it might be reduced to a narrower compass than it is; and that some
 parts of it might be contracted; the way it has been writ in, by catches, and many long intervals of interruption, being apt to cause some 
repetitions. But to confess the truth, I am now too lazy, or too busy to make it shorter.
I am not ignorant how little I herein consult my own reputation, when I knowingly let it go with a fault, so apt to disgust the most judicio
us, who are always the nicest readers. But they who know sloth is apt to content itself with any excuse, will pardon me, if mine has prevail
ed on me, where, I think, I have a very good one. I will not therefore allege in my defence, that the same notion, having different respects
, may be convenient or necessary to prove or illustrate several parts of the same discourse; and that so it has happened in many parts of th
is: but waving that, I shall frankly avow, that I have sometimes dwelt long upon the same argument, and expressed it different ways, with a 
quite different design. I pretend not to publish this Essay for the information of men of large thoughts, and quick apprehensions; to such m
asters of knowledge, I profess myself a scholar, and therefore warn them beforehand not to expect any thing here, but what, being spun out o
f my own coarse thoughts, is fitted to men of my own size; to whom, perhaps, it will not be unacceptable, that I have taken some pains to ma
ke plain and familiar to their thoughts some truths, which established prejudice, or the abstractedness of the ideas themselves, might rende
r difficult. Some objects had need be turned on every side: and when the notion is new, as I confess some of these are to me, or out of the 
ordinary road, as I suspect they will appear to others; it is not one simple view of it, that will gain it admittance into every understandi
ng, or fix it there with a clear and lasting impression. There are few, I believe, who have not observed in themselves or others, that what 
in one way of proposing was very obscure, another way of expressing it has made very clear and intelligible; though afterward the mind found
 little difference in the phrases, and wondered why one failed to be understood more than the other. But every thing does not hit alike upon
 every man’s imagination. We have our understandings no less different than our palates; and he that thinks the same truth shall be equally 
relished by every one in the same dress, may as well hope to feast every one with the same sort of cookery: the meat may be the same, and th
e nourishment good, yet every one not be able to receive it with that seasoning: and it must be dressed another way, if you will have it go 
down with some, even of strong constitutions. The truth is, those who advised me to publish it, advised me, for this reason, to publish it a
s it is; and since I have been brought to let it go abroad, I desire it should be understood by whoever gives himself the pains to read it; 
I have so little affection to be in print, that if I were not flattered this Essay might be of some use to others, as I think it has been to
 me, I should have confined it to the view of some friends, who gave the first occasion to it. My appearing therefore in print, being on pur
pose to be as useful as I may, I think it necessary to make what I have to say, as easy and intelligible to all sorts of readers, as I can. 
And I had much rather the speculative and quick-sighted should complain of my being in some parts tedious, than that any one, not accustomed
 to abstract speculations, or prepossessed with different notions, should mistake, or not comprehend my meaning.
It will possibly be censured as a great piece of vanity or insolence in me, to pretend to instruct this our knowing age; it amounting to lit
tle less, when I own, that I publish this Essay with hopes it may be useful to others. But if it may be permitted to speak freely of those, 
who with a feigned modesty condemn as useless, what they themselves write, methinks it savours much more of vanity or insolence, to publish 
a book for any other end; and he fails very much of that respect he owes the public, who prints, and consequently expects men should read th
at, wherein he intends not they should meet with any thing of use to themselves or others: and should nothing else be found allowable in thi
s treatise, yet my design will not cease to be so; and the goodness of my intention ought to be some excuse for the worthlessness of my pres
ent. It is that chiefly which secures me from the fear of censure, which I expect not to escape more than better writers. Men’s principles, 
notions, and relishes are so different, that it is hard to find a book which pleases or displeases all men. I acknowledge the age we live in
 is not the least knowing, and therefore not the most easy to be satisfied. If I have not the good luck to please, yet nobody ought to be of
fended with me. I plainly tell all my readers, except half a dozen, this treatise was not at first intended for them; and therefore they nee
d not be at the trouble to be of that number. But yet if any one thinks fit to be angry, and rail at it, he may do it securely: for I shall 
find some better way of spending my time, than in such kind of conversation. I shall always have the satisfaction to have aimed sincerely at
 truth and usefulness, though in one of the meanest ways. The commonwealth of learning is not at this time without master-builders, whose mi
ghty designs in advancing the sciences, will leave lasting monuments to the admiration of posterity; but every one must not hope to be a Boy
le, or a Sydenham; and in an age that produces such masters, as the great — Huygenius, and the incomparable Mr. Newton, with some others of 
that strain; it is ambition enough to be employed as an under-labourer in clearing the ground a little, and removing some of the rubbish tha
t lies in the way to knowledge; which certainly had been very much more advanced in the world, if the endeavours of ingenious and industriou
s men had not been much cumbered with the learned but frivolous use of uncouth, affected, or unintelligible terms, introduced into the scien
ces, and there made an art of, to that degree, that philosophy, which is nothing but the true knowledge of things, was thought unfit, or unc
apable to be brought into well-bred company, and polite conversation. Vague and insignificant forms of speech, and abuse of language, have s
o long passed for mysteries of science; and hard and misapplied words, with little or no meaning, have, by prescription, such a right to be 
mistaken for deep learning, and height of speculation, that it will not be easy to persuade, either those who speak, or those who hear them,
 that they are but the covers of ignorance, and hindrance of true knowledge. To break in upon the sanctuary of vanity and ignorance, will be
, I suppose, some service to human understanding: though so few are apt to think they deceive or are deceived in the use of words; or that t
he language of the sect they are of, has any faults in it which ought to be examined or corrected; that I hope I shall be pardoned, if I hav
e in the third book dwelt long on this subject, and endeavoured to make it so plain, that neither the inveterateness of the mischief, nor th
e prevalence of the fashion, shall be any excuse for those, who will not take care about the meaning of their own words, and will not suffer
 the significancy of their expressions to be inquired into.
I have been told, that a short epitome of this treatise, which was printed 1688, was by some condemned without reading, because innate ideas
 were denied in it; they too hastily concluding, that if innate ideas were not supposed, there would be little left, either of the notion or
 proof of spirits. If any one take the like offence at the entrance of this treatise, I shall desire him to read it through; and then I hope
 he will be convinced, that the taking away false foundations, is not to the prejudice, but advantage of truth; which is never injured or en
dangered so much, as when mixed with, or built on falsehood. In the second edition, I added as followeth:
The bookseller will not forgive me, if I say nothing of this second edition, which he has promised, by the correctness of it, shall make ame
nds for the many faults committed in the former. He desires too, that it should be known, that it has one whole new chapter concerning ident
ity, and many additions and amendments in other places. These I must inform my reader are not all new matter, but most of them either farthe
r confirmations of what I had said, or explications, to prevent others being mistaken in the sense of what was formerly printed, and not any
 variation in me from it; I must only except the alterations I have made in Book II. Chap. 21.
What I had there writ concerning liberty and the will, I thought deserved as accurate a view, as I was capable of; those subjects having in 
all ages exercised the learned part of the world, with questions and difficulties, that have not a little perplexed morality and divinity; t
hose parts of knowledge, that men are most concerned to be clear in. Upon a closer inspection into the working of men’s minds, and a stricte
r examination of those motives and views they are turned by, I have found reason somewhat to alter the thoughts I formerly had concerning th
at, which gives the last determination to the will in all voluntary actions. This I cannot forbear to acknowledge to the world with as much 
freedom and readiness, as I at first published what then seemed to me to be right; thinking myself more concerned to quit and renounce any o
pinion of my own, than oppose that of another, when truth appears against it. For it is truth alone I seek, and that will always be welcome 
to me, when or from whence soever it comes.
But what forwardness soever I have to resign any opinion I have, or to recede from any thing I have writ, upon the first evidence of any err
our in it; yet this I must own, that I have not had the good luck to receive any light from those exceptions I have met with in print agains
t any part of my book; nor have, from any thing that has been urged against it, found reason to alter my sense, in any of the points that ha
ve been questioned. Whether the subject I have in hand requires often more thought and attention than cursory readers, at least such as are 
prepossessed, are willing to allow: or, whether any obscurity in my expressions casts a cloud over it, and these notions are made difficult 
to others apprehensions in my way of treating them: so it is, that my meaning, I find, is often mistaken, and I have not the good luck to be
 every where rightly understood. There are so many instances of this, that I think it justice to my reader and myself, to conclude, that eit
her my book is plainly enough written to be rightly understood by those who peruse it with that attention and indifferency, which every one,
 who will give himself the pains to read, ought to employ in reading; or else, that I have writ mine so obscurely, that it is in vain to go 
about to mend it. Which ever of these be the truth, it is myself only am affected thereby, and therefore I shall be far from troubling my re
ader with what I think might be said, in answer to those several objections I have met with, to passages here and there of my book: since I 
persuade myself, that he who thinks them of moment enough to be concerned whether they are true or false, will be able to see, that what is 
said, is either not well founded, or else not contrary to my doctrine, when I and my opposer come both to be well understood.
If any, careful that none of their good thoughts should be lost, have published their censures of my Essay, with this honour done to it, tha
t they will not suffer it to be an Essay; I leave it to the public to value the obligation they have to their critical pens, and shall not w
aste my reader’s time in so idle or ill-natured an employment of mine, as to lessen the satisfaction any one has in himself, or gives to oth
ers, in so hasty a confutation of what I have written.
The booksellers preparing for the fourth edition of my Essay, gave me notice of it, that I might, if I had leisure, make any additions or al
terations I should think fit. Whereupon I thought it convenient to advertise the reader, that besides several corrections I had made here an
d there, there was one alteration which it was necessary to mention, because it ran through the whole book, and is of consequence to be righ
tly understood. What I thereupon said was this:
Clear and distinct ideas are terms, which, though familiar and frequent in men’s mouths, I have reason to think every one who uses, does not
 perfectly understand. And possibly it is but here and there one, who gives himself the trouble to consider them so far as to know what he h
imself or others precisely mean by them: I have therefore in most places chose to put determinate or determined, instead of clear and distin
ct, as more likely to direct men’s thoughts to my meaning in this matter. By those denominations, I mean some object in the mind, and conseq
uently determined, i. e. such as it is there seen and perceived to be. This, I think, may fitly be called a determinate or determined idea, 
when such as it is at any time objectively in the mind, and so determined there, it is annexed, and without variation determined to a name o
r articulate sound, which is to be steadily the sign of that very same object of the mind, or determinate idea.
To explain this a little more particularly. By determinate, when applied to a simple idea, I mean that simple appearance which the mind has 
in its view, or perceives in itself, when that idea is said to be in it: by determinate, when applied to a complex idea, I mean such an one 
as consists of a determinate number of certain simple or less complex ideas, joined in such a proportion and situation, as the mind has befo
re its view, and sees in itself, when that idea is present in it, or should be present in it, when a man gives a name to it: I say, should b
e; because it is not every one, not perhaps any one, who is so careful of his language, as to use no word, till he views in his mind the pre
cise determined idea, which he resolves to make it the sign of. The want of this is the cause of no small obscurity and confusion in men’s t
houghts and discourses.
I know there are not words enough in any language, to answer all the variety of ideas that enter into men’s discourses and reasonings. But t
his hinders not, but that when any one uses any term, he may have in his mind a determined idea, which he makes it the sign of, and to which
 he should keep it steadily annexed, during that present discourse. Where he does not, or cannot do this, he in vain pretends to clear or di
stinct ideas: it is plain his are not so; and therefore there can be expected nothing but obscurity and confusion, where such terms are made
 use of, which have not such a precise determination.
Upon this ground I have thought determined ideas a way of speaking less liable to mistakes, than clear and distinct: and where men have got 
such determined ideas of all that they reason, inquire, or argue about, they will find a great part of their doubts and disputes at an end. 
The greatest part of the questions and controversies that perplex mankind, depending on the doubtful and uncertain use of words, or (which i
s the same) indetermined ideas, which they are made to stand for; I have made choice of these terms to signify, 1. Some immediate object of 
the mind, which it perceives and has before it, distinct from the sound it uses as a sign of it. 2. That this idea, thus determined, i. e. w
hich the mind has in itself, and knows, and sees there, be determined without any change to that name, and that name determined to that prec
ise idea. If men had such determined ideas in their inquiries and discourses they would both discern how far their own inquiries and discour
ses went, and avoid the greatest part of the disputes and wranglings they have with others.
Besides this, the bookseller will think it necessary I should advertise the reader, that there is an addition of two chapters wholly new; th
e one of the association of ideas, the other of enthusiasm. These, with some other larger additions never before printed, he has engaged to 
print by themselves after the same manner, and for the same purpose, as was done when this essay had the second impression.
In the sixth edition, there is very little added or altered; the greatest part of what is new, is contained in the 21st chapter of the secon
d book, which any one, if he thinks it worth while, may, with a very little labour, transcribe into the margin of the former edition.